# Bibi's Cases

You may have heard Bibi say that the cases against him are cleary falling apart. If you only get your information from the English media, you may have no idea what he's talking about.
So here's a primer on the Bibi cases. I'm keeping this as short as possible.
Quick note about sources:
Many of points below were reported in Israeli media, often by the excellent Israeli reporters Ayala Hason and Amit Segal.
Much of the additional information was dug up by Avi Weiss, a retired police investigator who works as an expert in the Israeli communication industry. Weiss found countless documents related mostly to the 4000 case, which are available on https://www.telecomnews.co.il/.
- The cases:
- Case 1000: Bibi received cigars and champagne from a millionaire friend called Milchen. This wasn't called bribery because there's no accusation he gave anything back. Instead, it was labeled as 'breach of trust', an amorphous term that can include just about anything.
1. The law regarding public servants accepting gifts in Israel is archaic and built for a different era, when Israel also prohibited owning dollars, for example. No amount is named in the law, making it subjective. Instead, the law refers to 'what is reasonable.'
2. The bill of indictment contains shekel amounts in the hundreds of thousands, to the exact shekel! I was personally very curious how the prosecution obtained these precise amounts. We now know the numbers are mostly fictional. When Bibi's lawyers asked to see where the prosecution obtained these numbers, the prosecution admitted it didn't have any real figures.
3. It appears that the prosecution took *all* the champagne and cigars Milchen procured and dumped roughly 60% of it into the charges. This is very curious, because the prime minister's residence registers everything that arrives. If the prosecution wanted to know the exact amounts, that would have been the correct path to obtaining the sum.
4. The prosecution created an entity called "Bibi and his wife" to make the charges seem far worse than they were. This is not legitimate, and the court forced the prosecution to take the bill of indictment back and to correct it, removing anything related to Bibi's wife. The prosecution had to be told to do this multiple times, since they didn't comply the first time.
5. In reality, these goods effectively have a value of 0 shekels. Why? Because by law, the PM can have whatever fine goods he wants supplied to him by the state: whiskey, champagne, cigars -- anything. Previous PMs asked and were given these things, because that's the law. It makes the notion of these kinds of gifts ridiculous in the context of a prime minister.
6. Despite this fact, Bibi consulted serious law experts in real-time and they told him there was no reason to worry -- that personal gifts from friends were completely fine.
- Case 2000: Arnon Mozes, the most powerful media mogul in Israel (who hates Bibi and the right wing Israel Hayom paper) attempted to bribe Netanyahu.
Mozes is indeed very powerful and threatened to destroy Bibi's political career if he didn't comply. Nevertheless, Bibi didn't accept the bribe and even recorded the conversation with Mozes to protect himself, but is charged with not refusing Mozes fast enough i.e. *immediately and to his face*. For this, he is once again accused with the amorphous "breach of trust".
Honestly, this case is so ridiculous it's actually impossible to take it seriously. Mozes himself (i.e. the attempted briber) wasn't even charged until a public outcry followed.
- Case 4000: Bibi is accused of taking a bribe from his millionaire friend Elovich, owner of Bezeq, Yes, Walla and Yad 2, and in return, giving Elovich millions in regulations by allowing Bezeq to merge with Yes and allowing for the sale of Yad 2. The 'bribe' Bibi is supposed to have received in return is the first of its kind in the western world: positive coverage, specifically in the site Walla.
1. This is the most complex case to dissect because it involves a lot of details.
2. First of all, this case demonstrates how excessive the regulation in Israel is. Elovich was majority owner in both Bezeq and Yes. Any matter concerning their merger is purely one of making sure the shareholders and creditors weren't hurt. Because of the Israeli Bezeq law though, every move - even the most minor one - Bezeq makes has to be approved by countless layers of bureaucracy.
3. Indeed, the merger of Bezeq and Yes was agreed to by the bureaucracy since around 2003, long before Bibi is accused of approving the merger as a form of quid pro quo in 2016. Many documents exist and have been documented by Avi Weiss showing all layers of approval of the merger by all the regulatory authorities, including the previous AG himself. Bibi had nothing meaningful to add to the process - he signed what came to his desk long after all the regulators approved of it.
4. The prosecution never consulted experts in Israel's communication landscape. These experts would have told them that the merger was completely appropriate (which is why it had years of regulatory approval stamps on it).
5. According to the prosecution, the person who was ordered by Bibi to make the relevant changes in the communication office was Shlomo Filber. Filber was threatened with a personal lawsuit and turned state witness. However, Filber is on record saying that he acted in the capacity of manager of the communication office professionally, in good faith, and only for the good of the country. In his words, the only reason he didn't resist turning state witness is because "he didn't have millions of shekels and 3 years of his life to waste". (Filber now operates a successful polling firm) The case against Filber has just been dropped by the prosecution, and now he's dropping more and more hints that he's not going to co-operate with them.
6. If there really was a benefit involving millions of shekels that Netanyahu gave to Elovitch, that money went to the relevant companies: Bezeq and Yes. As such, the companies should be charged as well, to retrieve the millions supposedly stolen from the government. Such charges, against Bezeq in particular, have not been brought forward.
7. The prosecution doesn't have a single piece of evidence that Bibi and Elovitch made any sort of explicit quid pro quo arrangement outside of their basic friendship. Instead, they say they had an 'implicit' arrangement - one that was never communicated.
- Case 4000: Positive Coverage
1. The other side of case 4000 involves the 'positive coverage' Bibi was supposed to have obtained from Elovitch in return for the 'favor' he provided in allowing the merger. Anyone who has followed Bibi for any amount of time knows that he is the last politician to get positive coverage in Israeli media. With few exceptions, he gets the worst coverage, while other politicians (generally his opponents) get favorable coverage in Maariv, Yediot, Channels 12 and 13 etc.
2. On the 'positive coverage' side, the prosecution never checked the coverage on Walla in the relevant years. Neither did they consult media experts.  Instead, they simply stated as fact that Bibi received positive coverage on the Walla site.
3. What does this 'positive coverage' consist of? The prosecution lists instances where Bibi asked to modify articles or pictures in the website Walla. Put aside the fact that this is a normal part of the media-politician relationship. Put into perspective, the prosecution claims that Bibi's team complained on average around 3 times a month about articles in Walla. In reality, out of the thousands of articles on Walla in the relevant years, almost all were strongly anti-Bibi. This is not what positive coverage looks like.
4. This is not a coincidence. The main editors at Walla were (and still are) strongly anti-Bibi, referring to him as a 'despicable dog' and 'Kim the dictator'. They took any requests for some balance in coverage, which often came from the owner himself - Elovitch - as an affront.
5. As in the 1000 case, the prosecution once again performed the trick of lumping Bibi and his wife into a single entity, something which they were force by the court to fix. Very few of the articles had anything to do with Bibi himself -- almost all were unfavorable reports about his wife.
6. Additionally, it appears Bibi himself has no connection to almost any of the requests for the changes in the articles. The prosecution states only that there are 'some indications' that Bibi may have been involved.
7. Given the above, it's no surprise that since the beginning of the trial, the prosecution changed the charges from the original 'positive coverage' - already a worldwide innovation in the field of law - to an even flimsier 'high willingness to respond'. You see, it's not that the coverage was tilted towards Bibi, but just that Elovitch was 'too willing to respond' to Bibi's requests.  This is now legitimately counted as a form of bribery.
8. To get a little more specific, most of the claims for positive coverage are based on the testimony of Ilan Yeshua, CEO of Walla and a big Bibi opponent, who secretly recorded his boss, Elovitch, for 5 years(!). He then handed over selective recordings to the Prosecution. Yeshua never received state witness status for unknown reasons. In addition, Yeshua made 15 million shekels from the sale of Yad 2 which was part of the merger deal, yet he hasn't been accused of anything.
9. Within the Internet media landscape in Israel in the relevant years, Walla was a fairly minor site - in fact, it was the last ranked among the known sites in Israel - and was rarely accessed for political news but rather mostly for personal email access.
- General Problems
1. Of course, if the prosecution actually prosecuted media-politician transactions consistently, every politician and publicity office would end up in jail. Lapid, Saar, Shaked, Bennett -- all of them get more favorable coverage in the media, and this is no coincidence: they provide the moguls who own the media, such as Mozes, with benefits and legislative support. For example, Bennett and Shaked opposed the Yisrael Hayom law in order to help Mozes. As another example, Lapid had countless meetings with Mozes that were erased from his daily schedule, and Shaked publicly changed her mind about a law when she stated that 'Noni (Mozes) wouldn't approve'. Media moguls control most of the politicians in Israel -- they ask for favors and give coverage in response. One of the few politicians who *doesn't* participate in this ritual is Bibi Netanyahu.
2. In light of the above, given how weak the cases are, why would the prosecution pursue them? Especially against the elected prime minister of Israel? The best guess we have is that the prosecution never expected Bibi to stay in power this long. They thought he would either be kicked out of office due to the indictment, or that he would offer to resign rather than go to trial, as almost all politicians have in the past. Bibi decided to stay and fight, and now the case is being exposed in court.
3. Another clue to this is the fact that the bill of indictment includes 333(!) witnesses. Deposing this many witnesses will make the trial take years. In essence, the prosecution threatened Bibi with having years of his life dedicated to tackling this case. In addition, many of the named witnesses have nothing whatsoever to do with the case. Lapid, current political opponent of Bibi's, is named as a witness against him. So is Bibi's own previous lawyer.
4. The prosecution committed unspeakable abuses of power while hunting for Bibi. They interrogated all of his assistants - anyone who was related to him in any way - hoping to unearth some dirt, before they had any reason to suspect any crime.
5. Israel has a basic law that states that permission must be given by the attorney general before an investigation can be made into the prime minister. In fact, every major step of the investigation needs to be approved. This has been interpreted as written permission by the AG, making sure that investigation of the people's elected representative is done carefully without and 'fishing' for crimes, and trying to prevent undemocratic bureaucratic coups.
6. Netanyahu's lawyers had asked to see the AG's written permission, and were denied by the prosecution, who claimed they had no right to ask for such a thing. The court then ruled that the prosecution had to provide proof of the the AG's permission. The prosecution then changed their story to say that although there were no written documents, the AG approved every step orally. In response, the court ordered the protocols of the relevant meetings to be given to the defense. The defense was given documents with everything blacked out but a few sentences with virtually no relevant content. The judges finally understood and admitted that in reality there was *no* appropriate permission granted to start to the investigation, and the prosecution had in fact lied about it repeatedly. Rather than immediately stopping the case, the judges criticized the Prosecution's behavior, but declared they would consider invalidating the case after all the facts of the case were judged (something that would never fly in an American court).
7. In fact, we now know that the investigation into Bibi, specifically in case 1000, occurred long before permission was given by the AG, and in fact happened *despite* Mandelblit (current AG) and Weinstein (previous AG) *closing* these investigations. The investigations were carried out illegally by the prosecution and by the police. The prosecution eventually forced AG Mandelblit to accept the conclusions of the investigations despite him previously having shut them down.
8. One of Bibi's assistants, Nir Hafetz, was turned state witness against him. The police placed him in a dirty cell for a prolonged period of time. He emerged red, itchy and complaining of being bitten by fleas. They forced him to recount dates of meetings between Netnyahu and Elovitch, and when he said he couldn't remember anything relevant, the police used knowledge of his secret lover against him. They summoned his lover with no pretext whatsoever, and arranged for her to walk past him in the police station. Hafetz, who was married with kids, broke down but still couldn't remember anything useful. The police made him exit the room (where the conversation was recorded) and 'jogged his memory', pushing him to keep trying, until he 'remembered' the information they wanted.
9. Elovitch's bank accounts were confiscated and he was separated from his son. The police forced Elovitch to give them the goods on Bibi, while he repeated over and over he had no criminal information to provide. They then did the same to the son, threatening him with repeated threats until he begged his father to give the police what they want. Elovitch is on record replying to his son that he's not willing to lie, and that he simply has nothing to give the police. The police forced Elovitch's son to change lawyers to the same lawyer they provided Hafetz with -- behavior which is completely illegal according to Israeli law.
10. The bill of indictment presented against Bibi was improper. It included presentation of one-sided evidence attached to the charges, which is both illegal and completely unprecedented. It seems highly unlikely that the prosecution made such a basic error by mistake -- the intent was most likely to attack Bibi in the court of public opinion. The court eventually made the prosecution fix the bill and remove the evidence.
11. This joins 3 years of constant one-sided leaks to the press by the prosecution, which were continuously covered by the nightly news, eating away at Netanyahu's public opinion and making the public think he was corrupt. These leaks are illegal, carrying a sentence of 3 years each, but the leaks were never investigated despite being continuous. When AG Mandelblit was asked by the court to investigate the leaks, he came back after a week claiming there were too many possible suspects to investigate, even though Avi Weiss was able to forensically narrow down the likely leakers based only on the documents which were leaked.
12. In 2020, Bibi's assistant was investigated and had his phone confiscated and searched through. The pretext was that he 'bothered a witness', specifically Shlomo Filber (see above). The police claimed they responded to Filber's complaint, but as we saw above, Filber is very supportive of Bibi and this is unlikely. The police searched through the assistant's phone without a warrant. This is a very common pattern in Israeli police tactics. The court later criticized the police, but the police never experiences any penalty from this illegal behavior nor is evidence usually disqualified due to improper acquisition in Israel.
13. One of the most aggressive lead investigators in Bibi's cases dated Judi Mozes, Arnon Mozes's sister. This was a grave conflict of interest, but Mahash, the department that supervises the police (and is part of the prosecution), rather than investigate and uncover the issue and its repercussions with regard to Bibi's cases, hid it from public knowledge and swept it under the rug.
- AG Mandelblit
1. The big question until recently has been the following: even if the prosecution was after Bibi from the start, why would AG Mandelblit, who was appointed by Bibi and worked for the Likud in the past, allow such a weak case against him, throwing the political system into years of chaos?
2. To understand this, we need to understand that the dream of every AG in Israel is to be appointed to the Supreme Court. It turns out that AG Mandelblit had a very serious scandal while he was army prosecutor, where he was recorded acting illegally in the chief of staff's office. This recording cannot be deleted due to archiving laws, but it was classified and made illegal to distribute in Israel.
3. This scandal invalidates Mandelblit from public legal service, but was hidden from the committee that nominated Mandelblit for the AG position. Members of the committee have said publicly that had they known about his behavior in this scandal, they would never have nominated Mandelblit.
4. The nominating committee nominated only one candidate: Mandelblit. In this respect, it's not correct to say that Bibi appointed him -- there was no other choice provided.
5. The theory has been that Mandelblit was being controlled by Shai Nitzan, his supposed underling and the chief prosecutor who was after Bibi's head, using this recording as leverage. If the recording were to be released, Mandelblit's career would be over, not to mention his chance at becoming a Supreme Court judge.
6. Until recently, this was only a theory. We now have confirmation of this theory by Mandelblit himself, courtesy of recordings released by Efy Naveh - ex-head of the Israeli lawyer association - who has intimate knowledge about all the skeletons in the justice system's closet.
In the recordings, Mandelblit tells Naveh that Shai Nitzan 'is an a**hole who's refusing to close the case against (Mandelblit)', and that he 'has (Mandelblit) by the throat'.
- The Prosecution
1. The prosecution in Israel is very sick. These aren't my words -- they're the words of Hilah Gerstel, a judge and lawyer who was appointed briefly to try and supervise the prosecution. In her words, she came in expecting to find good people, but found a sick system that doesn't care about revealing the truth. She had especially strong criticism against Shai Nitzan, the chief prosecutor at the time. Gerstel was chased out of her job by a hostile prosecution unwilling to be restrained.
2. In effect, the prosecution in Israel has no oversight at all. What little supervision is present is purely symbolic and has no teeth whatsoever. Nobody in the prosecution has ever been sued, and they have no incentive to avoid making mistakes that cost people their lives or livelihoods. When an accused person is found innocent, the attitude in the organization is one of failure rather than rejoicing that an innocent person avoided being falsely persecuted.
3. Ruby Rivlin, the current president of Israel, has called the prosecution 'a criminal organization'. Tomy Lapid, Yair Lapid's (far more intelligent) father, referred to the prosecution as a 'legal terror group'.
4. Ruth David was a corrupt prosecutor involved in leaking information to suspects for monetary bribes. Despite massive evidence of corruption, AG Mandelblit closed the case against her and nothing happened to her.
5. Liat Ben Ari was assistant prosecutor to Shai Nitzan and is chief financial prosecutor of Israel. She is one of the chief architects of the cases against Bibi and the main prosecutor going up against his defense in court. Just to give an idea of the lack of equality before the law, Liat was found to have bought an investment apartment illegally in Rosh Ha'ayin. She participated in an auction meant for people who live in RH, despite having no intent to live there. Her offer was accepted immediately. It also happened to be that the auction was run by her cousin. She then split the apartment and rented the basement with no legal permission for either. She made at least hundreds of thousands of shekels if not more off of this series of admitted crimes. Her name is on the lease. In her investigation, which took place only due to heavy public pressure, she answered every question with "I know nothing about that." And yet, the case against her was closed. Nothing has happened to her, and most likely nothing will. She is above the law.
6. Even if the cases against Bibi are fake (which I think is quite obvious), nobody in the prosecution will pay a price for driving the country into a political frenzy for years. In most likelihood they will even be promoted, perhaps even to the Supreme Court.
7. Of course, this doesn't mean that everyone in the state prosecution is corrupt -- there are many good people there performing an important job. But the people in control - the people who set the tone - appear to be, if not corrupt, then overly zealous and undeterred by minor considerations such as truth.
8. If this can be done against a popular, sitting prime minister of Israel, what do you suppose happens to the poor citizen, Jewish or Arab, who gets caught in the prosecution's net?
