# A Coup via Judicial Means
## How Israeli Democracy Was Sabotaged

by Moshik Kovarsky, translated by Yotam Barnoy

1. The 2015 elections were a turning point for the Israeli Left. From a state of unification and leadership in the polls, the Left moved to a scorching defeat, with the right-wing bloc gaining 67 MKs (Members of Knesset – The Israeli Parliament, out of 120) and forming a right-wing government (initially 61 MKs, and 67 MKs a year later). This was a significant blow to the Left following the promising, well-oiled V15 campaign, which we now know was at least partially funded by the U.S. State Department.
2. During the election, an intensive campaign was conducted targeting the Netanyahu family. Evidence for this can be seen, for example, in Raviv Drucker's article in Haaretz on January 25th, 2015, nauseatingly titled "It's time to talk about the Mrs." (referring to Sarah Netanyahu). Meni Naftali, the fired housekeeper of the PM's residence, was applauded by the media in a series of interviews and indulging articles (especially on the Walla! website, which was later ridiculously accused of being "controlled" by Netanyahu…), as he repeatedly slandered Sarah Netanyahu and the rest of the family.
3. This stinging defeat brought the Left to understand that it would be impossible to bring down Netanyahu by democratic means and that the only realistic possibility would involve the legal system. A strengthened Netanyahu posed a threat to three separate centers of power: the media, the judiciary, and the academia. When the campaign's planners came to understand that the public was not sufficiently affected by the slander of the PM's family, and that Netanyahu still remained the most popular leader by a mile, the decision was made to go after Netanyahu himself. The witch-hunting season had broken out in earnest.
4. The opening shot took the form of Gidi Weitz's investigation in Haaretz. On October 29th, 2015, Weitz published an article entitled "Not Just Israel Hayom: the Popular News Site Walla! is in service of Netanyahu". This article served as the catalyst for the state comptroller to open an investigation into the affairs of the Ministry of Communications. The ensuing process had the devastating effect of delaying the deployment of Israel's critical fiber optics infrastructure and 5G cellular technology. According to the Ministry of Communication then-CEO Shlomo Filber, this delay has cost the state about NIS 52 billion to date. In retrospect, we can assert that Weitz's article (which we now know, after the testimonies in court, to be almost entirely baseless) is what led to case 4000.
5. At the same time, Avichai Mandelblit, the new attorney general (AG), took office in February 2016. Mandelblit possessed a skeleton in his closet in the form of the Harpaz affair, as well as an unresolved file with the police that could have derailed his career. From recordings of the AG's conversations with Efi Naveh, we now know that Mandelblit felt like "he [was] being held by the throat," in his own words.
6. The state prosecution and the police had already begun running investigations - some of which lacked the required permit - to obtain material from associates and sources hostile to the prime minister. One of the investigators' favorite tactics was to find unrelated offenses of close aides and advisors and then put a cruel choice before them: “Either be prosecuted for your actions (unrelated to Netanyahu) or betray the trust of your prime minister and provide incriminating information about him.” For example, Ari Harow, Netanyahu's veteran aide, was interrogated in December 2015 and again in the summer of 2016. All in all, he provided two tapes of conversations between Netanyahu and Arnon Mozes, which led to case 2000.
7. Netanyahu had accumulated quite a few rivals and enemies during his political years, many of whom found an eager audience for juicy gossip among the state prosecution and police. When he took office in February 2016, Mandelblit stated: "As soon as I enter, the State Comptroller and the police throw at us a concoction of minor issues, remnants of Bibi Tours and the dorm affair, all sorts of such trifles - things that seem like borderline gossip - and were it not for the fact that it concerned the PM, nobody would have done anything about them. But still, I decided we need to check them out." Out of this mountain of material, the prosecution was left only with case 1000. This case involved cigars and champagne worth an unclear and undocumented amount, and Netanyahu's alleged quid-pro-quo for Milchen during the relevant period (2011-2016) was virtually insignificant.
8. It's worth noting that the numbering of the cases is another sign of the ensuing witch hunt. The use of consecutive numbers (1000, 2000, 4000; the missing case 3000 was one in which the prosecution hoped to collect incriminating material in the submarine affair, but failed despite all its efforts) was intended to create among the public a feeling that these were signs of a consistent trend, and that there would also be cases 5000, 6000, and 7000. The aim was to undermine Benjamin Netanyahu's public status. Mandelblit himself was also placed under intense public pressure via the anarchist groups that demonstrated, harassed, and cursed him by his private home, with the police making not even the slightest effort to intervene.
9. Police Commissioner Alsheikh, who transferred from the Shin-Bet to the police in December 2015, encountered hostile media since he was a settler wearing a kippah. He has decided to hire Lior Horev, who was very hostile to Netanyahu, as his media consultant. Immediately, Alsheikh became the media's darling, as the police started leaking juicy materials to court and police reporters alike. The case of Chief of Staff Ritman and the complaint of Officer Z further strengthened the police's hostility towards the prime minister and his assistants, as well as the ambition to overthrow him.
10. During 2017, members of Lahav 433 (the "Israeli FBI") burned the midnight oil as hundreds of investigators and dozens of lawyers labored both in Israel and around the world to try and find incriminating material about Netanyahu using any means necessary. This included communicating with foreign countries and attempting to uncover bank accounts. A long line of suspects, including the prime minister himself, sat in front of grumpy investigators for hours on end as they attempted to threaten, seduce, and mislead their interrogatees, all with the intent of formulating an incriminating case against the PM.
11. The efforts of the legal system were taken up a notch when in February 2018, the police submitted their recommendation to prosecute the prime minister on charges of bribery in cases 1000 and 2000. They also recommended that Milchen be indicted for bribery -- a recommendation that was not ultimately accepted. Ilana Dayan's journalistic TV show "Fact" praised the police commissioner who boldly announced: "I have a [good] sense of smell for coriander, guavas, and liars… I do not work for Netanyahu." At the same time, great effort was made to attain two more state witnesses in addition to Harow.  Shlomo Filber (CEO of the Communications Office) and Nir Hefetz (media agent for the PM) were thus turned into state witnesses using underhanded tactics. At the end of 2020, Channel 13 reported that two and a half years earlier, in mid-2018, senior police officials conducted a methodical exercise. They concluded that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's immediate environment was run like a "criminal organization" - no less.
12. The heads of the police and the state prosecution were confident beyond a shadow of a doubt that the recruitment of their three state witnesses out of the PM's closest circle would inevitably lead to his retirement from political life. In a prominent article in Ynet on March 8th, 2018, retired justice Strashnov wrote: "Following the recent developments in case 4000 and the state witnesses - Harow, Filber, and Hefetz - the picture has changed… Therefore, I would recommend to you, Mr. Prime Minister, to resign now, put the keys on the table and say to the public: I'm done."
13. In his recent testimony in court, Hefetz scattered a long line of comments in favor of Netanyahu, and state witness Filber, who is yet to testify, repeatedly tweets claims contradicting the prosecution. Therefore, we can confidently state that the primary purpose of these witnesses' recruitment was to launch a psychological and political threat against Netanyahu. The AG did not believe that Netanyahu would persist with his claim of innocence and that he would insist on fighting to prove it.
14. In 2018, the pervading atmosphere of assured conviction had even started to affect Likud satellite parties that felt - and perhaps even hoped - that the 'old lion' was injured and that it was time to scramble for the inheritance. Thus, on November 14th, 2018, Lieberman mysteriously resigned from the coalition (allegedly due to inaction in Gaza), and Bennett and Shaked established the 'New Right' party to create a ‘right-wing alternative.’ The Knesset dissolved on December 26th, 2018, and elections were announced.
15. From the moment it appeared that Israel was going into elections and that Netanyahu had refused to resign on his own initiative, the justice system moved over to Plan B: overthrowing Netanyahu at the ballot box. The opening shot was a conference of the Keramim Forum in Kiryat Anavim in December 2018. The meeting was attended by famous Israeli judicial figures such as Aharon Barak, Yitzhak Zamir, Elyakim Rubinstein, and Moshe Lador. One of the participants in the meeting confirmed its existence yet refused to comment on the content. Still, it is estimated that the vast majority of participants supported the publication of an indictment, subject to a hearing, so long as this was done at least a month before the elections. In an interview with Dana Weiss in January 2019, Aharon Barak was willing to stoop momentarily down from Mount Olympus to say: "I am convinced that the AG (Mandelblit) will not embarrass me nor (former Chief Justice) Shamgar." The intimation was as clear as could be – the judicial system expected a forthcoming indictment!
16. During election season in the first two months of 2019, the prosecution engaged in all-out attacks against Netanyahu. Weaponized criminal leaks were used in full force to determine the outcome of the elections. Court reporters on the various channels and in the newspapers received fresh material – clearly illegal – from the interrogation rooms and courtrooms of the prosecution's offices, all of which was read out tendentially in the evening news to a captive audience. It's important to note that no material had yet been provided to the defense at that point. Thus, all leaks had to come from the prosecution and the police.
17. The effort to oust Netanyahu reached its peak on February 28th, 2019, when the AG published a long-winded letter of criminal suspicions (preceding an indictment), knowing full well that given the time left until the elections, which were scheduled to take place only 40 days later, Netanyahu and his lawyers would not be able to respond. Mandelblit and Shai Nitzan (state prosecutor) hoped that Netanyahu would lose to the rising political force of his opponent Gantz (who joined Lapid, Ashkenazi, and Ya'alon) and disappear from the political scene. As experienced jurists, they knew how scant the material in their possession was, and so their great hope was to force Netanyahu's resignation and avoid a trial.
18. A conservative estimate of the cost of Netanyahu's investigations runs between NIS 100 million and 200 million, with some saying as much as a quarter of a billion shekels. This is an amount that easily dwarfs the political campaign of any Israeli politician. Despite all this, the investigators did not find a single shekel associated illegally with Netanyahu nor a secret bank account linked to him. Inconceivably, all Netanyahu had received in the triple-naught cases according to the prosecution was:
- An unclear number of cigars (without documents and receipts, over a period of five years).
- Several bottles of champagne (ditto).
- One piece of jewelry, given as a birthday present to the prime minister's wife.
- Promises that never came to fruition to lower the level of hostility towards Netanyahu on the sites Ynet and Yediot Aharonot.
- An "exceptional responsiveness" to demands for coverage in the marginal Walla website.
19. Even if we accept the claims of the prosecution in full (and the evidence indicates that these claims are utterly disconnected from reality), these are still trivial matters, especially when balanced against the unquestionable contribution by the Prime Minister to the empowerment of Israel over the past decade, while working day and night tirelessly and withstanding massive international pressure.
20. The justice system's 2019 campaign was partially successful. Thanks to this campaign, Netanyahu did not defeat his competitors this time as he did in 2015. Yet, his bloc - excluding Bennett, who failed to pass the minimum threshold, and without Lieberman, who defected - gained a blocking number of 60 seats. No doubt had it not been for the manic campaign of nightly defamatory leaks and the publication of the indictment on the eve of the election, the right-wing bloc would have received at least 5 more center-right seats lost due to the unfounded accusations. The 2019-A elections and the preceding out-of-control behavior of the law enforcement agencies constitute the clearest proof of a government coup using judicial means.
21. Many in public wondered what led Avigdor Lieberman to defect from the right-wing bloc immediately after the election since, before them, there were scant hints of his future actions. The answer to this mystery may possibly be found in the news coming out these days that Shai Nitzan prevented Lieberman's confidant, Faina Kirschenbaum, from becoming a state witness against him. Instead, Faina and others in his party took the fall and went to jail, while Lieberman himself (i.e., the boss) remained unaccused. Is there a connection between these incidents? Only the prosecution knows. Another event worth recalling is when Yariv Levin (well-known Likud MK and critic of the justice system) was suggested as a candidate for Minister of Justice. One of the TV commentators most closely attached to the prosecution - Amnon Abramovitch - let out an explicit threat on TV: "I will say as a joke that Yariv Levin as Justice Minister implies another year of imprisonment for Netanyahu." A very unfunny joke indeed. The AG and senior prosecutors repeatedly thwarted Amir Ohana, who was eventually appointed as Justice Minister. They stymied both of the appointments Ohana attempted to make to the vacant state prosecutor position.
22. When no decision was reached in the September 2019 election (the right-wing bloc received only 56 seats, but the idea of joining anti-Zionist Arab parties has not yet been made kosher by the Left), the legal system organized for a mass campaign in the form of the pre-indictment hearing. Typically, the interval between the letter of criminal suspicions and the subsequent hearing lasts at least a year. Netanyahu, however, was required to meet an almost impossible schedule of 7 months, and amid an election campaign, no less. Netanyahu's request to make the hearing open so that the public would hear his side, as a counterbalance to the nightly leaks from the prosecution, was answered with contempt. "An unfounded, baseless request" was AG Mandelblit's reply. To make matters worse, the head prosecutor in the case chose to go on a family trip to a safari in Africa rather than listen to the defense's claims with an open mind.
23. From Caroline Glick's article in Israel Hayom, we learn that two American jurists - the mythological litigator Nate Levin and Prof. Avi Bell of the University of San Diego and Bar-Ilan - were brought to the hearing to present their main arguments regarding the central question around which the 4000 and 2000 cases revolve: was it possible to define 'positive coverage' for a politician by a media outlet as a bribe? Mandelblit rejected the request of the PM's attorneys to allow the American jurists to present their position, but changed his mind at the last moment, allowing them half an hour to make their case.
Levin and Bell were rushed to the conference room to present arguments submitted in writing a week earlier. In the report, which was also signed by Prof. Alan Dershowitz and attorney Richard Heideman, these top attorneys brought rich documentation of judgments and investigative reports from the US, UK, Australia, and Europe. In all of them, the question before the eyes of the judges and prosecutors was whether it was possible to limit – or worse, to incriminate - relations between media and politicians. The conclusion in all cases was the same: it was impossible, both in cases that involved a quid pro quo and those that did not. However, the prosecution did not give these claims any weight. The target was marked long in advance, and nothing would distract the prosecution from achieving its goal.
24. Customarily, the decision regarding an indictment following a hearing can take years, but in this case, the political schedule determined the prosecution's pacing. The March 2020 elections led Mandelblit to file the indictment within an unprecedentedly short amount of time. The indictment, which, even in the opinion of senior attorneys, was written very poorly, was filed on January 28th, 2020, less than two months before the election. To add insult to injury, it was filed just as Netanyahu was on a critical political mission at the White House.
25. The absurd split-screen visual, in which on one side, the Israeli Prime Minister participated in a historic "Deal of the Century" ceremony with the US president, while on the other side, an AG could barely conceal his smile while reading the PM's indictment, will forever serve as a stain on the Israeli judicial system. "Bribery, fraud, and breach of trust" has become the battle cry of an entire political camp based on hatred and ignorance.
26. This indictment, filed with unparalleled urgency, was met with equally harsh criticism by the court. The court sent the prosecution 10 months later to revise the indictment in many dozens of sections. We can therefore reach the sad conclusion that the prosecution's haste was motivated by the desire to bring about Netanyahu's defeat at the ballot box. This would have obviated their need to go to court with an absurdly weak case lacking real evidence, and with witnesses whose testimony crumbled during cross-examination.
27. Yet, despite all of the above interventions, the tie in the 2020 election was not broken. Likud finished as the largest party with 3 more seats than Blue and White. But the right-wing bloc without Lieberman had only 58 seats, and these circumstances, combined with the covid-19 emergency, dragged Israel kicking and screaming into a divided unity government. The primary source of conflict in this government, rather than any substantive disagreement, was the direct support of its leftist component for the mass demonstrations against Netanyahu in Balfour, the PM's residence. These demonstrations were massively fueled by the indictment. They were also given complete and disgraceful backing by the judicial system at the expense of the welfare of neighborhood residents and despite the massive health hazards they constituted. When elements within the unity government gave a hand to this anarchy, an irreparable rift was created. And, of course, over this whole mess hovered the menacing shadow of the trial which was about to start.
28. On January 3rd, 2021, the prosecution filed its revised indictment in court. As was customary by now, this was done on the night of the election. Surprisingly, however, the seed that may lead to victory over the power-hungry legal system was buried in this version of the indictment. The court granted the defense attorneys' request and demanded that the prosecution specify precisely how and where "exceptional responsiveness" was given to Netanyahu by the Walla! website. Thus, the prosecution was forced to append to the indictment an appendix listing 315 separate items. This same appendix inspired Project 315 (www.the315.org), a civic grassroots organization of volunteers working to show how said appendix, and the indictment itself, are constructed with negligence bordering on a complete distortion of reality.
29. The Likud and the right-wing bloc arrived at the 2021 elections while being forced to defend against unfounded accusations of corruption. Their opponents, all of whom have abundant skeletons in their closets, were not questioned at all (a partial list of these skeletons includes Gantz's Fifth Dimension Corporation, the Ayalim Association, and Lapid's secret meetings with Mozes in a villa in Savyon). Yet the Likud finished as the largest party by a significant margin, and the right-wing bloc received 65 seats. Nevertheless, the trial and the indictment gave right-wing defectors sufficient justification to steal their voters' votes and do the inconceivable: to bow down before anti-Zionist parties and form a government which is centered around the hatred for one man (Netanyahu); a government that serves as a doormat for the judicial system.
30. In 2022, as of the time of this writing, the State of Israel heads from one failure to another, while the prosecution and Lahav 433 (Israel's "FBI") rub their hands in glee. Eye-rolling, purist politicians reap the rewards of a coup founded on baseless criminal cases and marked political targets. This unprecedented, historic assault on democracy has succeeded so far, but the story is far from over. The correction will arrive, and it will do so far sooner than expected.
 

